# Call kiwi genotypes

This section developed by Else Mikkelsen, with minor edits by Jordan Bemmels.

## Obtain mapping data

The samples have [previously](https://github.com/jordanbemmels/kiwi-holocene/blob/main/02_Initial_read_processing.md) been mapped to the reference genome during initial read processing, so we can re-use the bam files for the 11 individuals of interest:

```
australis__Haast__KW36__RA0997
australis__NorthFiordland__KW41__R32961
australis__SouthFiordland__KW50__RA0202
australis__StewartIsland__KW51__RA0891
haastii__haastii__KW26__CD830
mantelli__Coromandel__KW09__R32852
mantelli__Eastern__KW11__NIBKOpo1
mantelli__Northland__KW04__41
mantelli__Taranaki__KW18__kiwiCarcass1
owenii__Kapiti__KW24__O20581
rowi__Okarito__KW32__R32934
```

## Call genotypes

First, we need to call all genotypes (variant and invariant) in all samples. From this data, we will be able to extract the gene sequences of each individual. Note that one assumption is that there have not been gene duplications in any individual relative to the reference.

Call genotypes with [bcftools](https://samtools.github.io/bcftools/). Note the list ```bam.list``` contains the paths to the 11 input bam files:

```bash
#set up working direcory
mkdir -p /home/0_GENOMES5/kiwi/1_genotypes
cd /home/0_GENOMES5/kiwi/1_genotypes

#call all sites
bcftools mpileup -B -C 50 -a AD,DP,SP -Ou -f kiwi_ref_genome.fna --threads 40 -b bam.list | bcftools call --threads 20 -f GQ,GP -m -O z - > Kiwi_11genomes.allsites.vcf.gz
#index the vcf file
bcftools index Kiwi_11genomes.allsites.vcf.gz

#get basic stats about VCF (number of SNPs)
vcftools --gzvcf Kiwi_11genomes.allsites.vcf.gz

```
`bcftools mpileup`: creates genotype likelihoods at each position in the genome, with their depth of coverage
* `-q`: minimum mapping quality to allow
* `-B`: avoid false SNPs by disabling probabilistic realignment
* `-b`: "list of input BAM filenames, one per line"
* `-C 50`: 
* `-Ou`: save time by not compressing the VCF file before piping it to the next command
* `-f`: FASTA file of indexed reference sequence

`bcftools call`: outputs the VCF file with only variant sites
* `--threads`: specifies number of threads that can be used
* `-m`: use the newer multiallelic caller (opposite of `-c`)
* `-c`: returns to the original samtools consensus caller
* `-v`: only output variant sites
* `-O z`: specifices that the output type is a compressed VCF file

**Output**: a compressed, indexed VCF file of all samples containing calls at all sites where they differ from the reference.
**Result**: 1,214,627,906 bp of sites with calls for 11 samples.

## Filter VCF file

* Minor Allele Frequency: I do not want to filter by MAF because I am concerned about bias (could affect some populations more severely than others since we have mixed different species)
* missing data: I will not filter based on missing data, since I am not trying to calculate popgen stats or anything like that, I want complete protein sequences
* Quality: I will filter out anything with quality below 20
* minimum depth: 5. I do not care about heterozygous calls. If heterozygous sites get miscalled as homozygous due to low depth, that is not a problem.
* maximum depth: 21. I do care about collapsed duplicates. The mean depth is 14, so filtering for a max of 21 should get rid of most things that have doubled (or higher) coverage due to duplication/collapsed repeats, hopefully.
* Indels: I am not going to use indels right now so I will remove them. Can get them later.

```bash
vcftools --gzvcf Kiwi_11genomes.allsites.vcf.gz --remove-indels --minQ 20 --min-meanDP 5 --max-meanDP 21 --recode --stdout | gzip -c > Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf.gz 
#get basic stats about VCF (number of SNPs)
vcftools --gzvcf Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf.gz

#compress with bgzip since it appears to not have been compressed
mv Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf.gz Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf
bcftools view -I Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf -O z -o Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf.gz
#bgzip -c Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf > Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf.gz

#index the vcf file
time /home/0_PROGRAMS/bcftools-1.10.2/bcftools index Kiwi_11genomes.min5max21.vcf.gz

```
* `--remove-indels`: remove indels, keep only SNPs
* `--max-missing 0.9`: filters out any SNP with more than 10% missing data. Note that it is BACKWARDS compared to what it seems logically it should be (would think the value referrs to the max allowed missing, but instead it refers to min non-missing threshold!). 
* `--minQ`: minimum quality score for a site
* `--minDP`: min depth per individual to call a genotype, anything lower will be turned into missing data
* `--maxDP`: max depth per individual to call a genotype, anything higher will be turned into missing data
* `--min-meanDP`: min AVERAGE depth per individual to keep a site, anything lower will be dropped from the dataset
* `--max-meanDP`: max AVERAGE depth per individual to keep a site, anything higher will be dropped from the dataset
* `--recode`: creates a new file based on the filtered data. INFO fields are taken out because they will often be rendered incorrect by the filtering. If you want to keep the INFO fields, also add `--recode-INFO-all`
* `--stdout` send the output to standard out instead of making a file - this way we can directly send it to be compressed with no intermediate file

**Results**: kept 1,188,070,226/1,214,627,906 sites.
